import BlogImage from "@/components/blog-image";
import BromptonImg from "./brompton.jpg";
import HumberImg from "./humber.jpg";
import KokopelliImg from "./kokopelli.jpg";
import LoadedImg from "./loaded.jpg";
import IslandsImg from "./islands.jpg";

export const metadata = { 
  title: "Put the Saddle to the Paddle", 
  date:"2021-08-24T12:00:00Z"
};

Cities are best explored by bike. I've always used my bike to get around
Toronto, and particularly over the pandemic have leveraged it to discover the
city's hidden gems and deeper cuts. And yet, as much as I have seen by road or
trail, there is a part that has mostly eluded me: the waterways.

This summer I decided to change that. In the spring I invested in an inflatable
packraft, and since then I've been able to explore a side to Toronto that I
scarcely knew existed. I have visited inlets and tributaries, sighted bird
species that I would never see inland, and — in a way that is hard to describe —
shifted my spatial understanding of the city from road-lined grid, to complex
network of rivers, roads, and ravines. Sometimes the road less travelled isn't
even a road!

<BlogImage src={IslandsImg} alt="Toronto islands bikerafting" caption="Perhaps best part of rafting is getting to the Toronto islands without the dang ferry!" />

I plan on sharing the details for these trips in future posts, but the thing I
get asked most about is actually the setup. Most of my day trips have been by
bike and boat; no car or rentals required! To the uninitiated this is known as
*bikerafting*.

As you can tell, bikerafting is just a generic term for bike + raft. There are
many ways to do it, and the method I've detailed below is just what works for
me. If you're interested in bikerafting, I encourage you to start with whatever
equipment you already own (assuming it's safe) and work off of that!

## The packraft

The best gear for any new activity is usually *the gear you already own*.
However, when it comes to bikerafting, you need to start with safety. As with
many water sports, there is a degree of risk associated with packrafting, and
this can be compounded when you are hauling heavy (and sharp) bikes.

For my packrafting setup I went with a Kokopelli Twain. The Twain is a
two-seater with a carrying capacity of 600 lbs. It has a 6 point “D-ring”
system, which you can use to tie gear onto the boat, as well as a waterproof
compartment inside the pontoon for keeping valuables dry. Most importantly, this
packraft is made from a sturdy Kevlar material, and explicitly targeted towards
bikerafters. The Twain comes with 4 compression straps, but you will also want a
few extras if you plan on mounting a bike.

<BlogImage src={KokopelliImg} alt="Kokopelli Twain" caption="The Kokopelli when
it was brand new, inflated in my parents' living room." />

The wonderful thing about packrafts is that they, well, pack. The Twain is about
the size of a sleeping bag when it is rolled up. This makes it ideal for storing
at home, or carrying on a bike. Similarly, the paddles (also sold by Kokopelli)
are collapsible, and bundle into a reasonably compact size.

For life jackets I opted for the Mustang 100 inflatable PFD. For me, this jacket
is a good fit because of the gentle nature of the waterbodies on which I've been
rafting. Because it is inflatable, it doesn't take up a lot of room and is easy
to transport. (All that being said, if you are looking for a PFD I strongly
encourage you to do your own research and find one suitable to your activity.)

Finally, I also purchased a Kokopelli Feather Pump. This is purely for
convenience, but it makes filling up the raft a breeze!

## The bike(s)

For the last year I have been obsessed with my Brompton. I could write a whole
post on Bromptons alone, but the TL;DR is that they are ultracompact folding
bicycles. Unlike most folding bikes that fold at one or two hinge points, the
Brompton folds at three. The result is a relatively small form factor that makes
it ideal for quickly loading and unloading from a packraft. In fact it is so
small that I've been able to throw two Brampton's on the raft!

A common misconception is the Brompton's small size makes it unsuitable for
carrying gear. On the contrary, the 16” wheels provide amble space above the
wheel where a 700C wheel would not. I've found this is also ideal for weight
distribution as the cargo is aligned with the bike' primary axis, while panniers
should ideally be balanced on the sides of the bike.

<BlogImage src={BromptonImg} alt="Brompton" caption="The &quot;Brommy&quot;
before I punished it through a Canadian winter." />

Bromptons come with a proprietary front block that is handy for mounting bags.
The largest bag they offer, the Borough bag, has a 28L capacity and can carry
almost as much as the back rack.

While this setup has worked well for me, you could theoretically bring any bike
on the packraft. This might involve a little more work, as you would need to
remove the non-drive pedal, the front wheel, and possibly the back wheel.

## Putting it all together

Any given trip begins with loading up the Brompton with the packraft and
accessories. I've found that the raft itself fits nicely on the back rack, and
can be held in place with two compression straps. The Brompton rack elastics can
also come in handy.

Everything else goes on the front of the bike. The collapsed paddles don't quite
fit in the Borough bag, so can be strapped on top instead. It takes about 5
minutes to load up the bike.

Riding with the loaded bike is comfortable and responsive, if slightly sluggish.
(But then, why would you be in a hurry?) I've ridden this way for 10 minutes to
the nearest beach, or for 2 hours to a more distant launch site. Either way it
hasn't been an issue.

<BlogImage src={LoadedImg} alt="Loaded Brompton" caption="The Brompton with the
packraft and gear." />

Once at your launch site it's a matter of setting up the packraft and loading it
up. There isn't anything special going on here until it comes time to loading
the bike(s). The first bike can be lashed to the bow using the compression
straps. Again the Brompton comes in handy here because the non-drive pedal folds
in, and thus can reduce friction on the boat.

Bringing two bikes is really only possible with this setup if the second bike is
a Brompton (though I've sure some other fold-up bikes would work too)! I've
found that the Brompton can sit in the middle of the raft between the two
paddlers. It's a tight fit! But I've still managed to pull this off with my
brother and I; we are 6'3” and 6'0”, respectively.

Loading the boat takes around 20 - 30 minutes. (For me it took closer to 30
since my brother is useless). With the bikes loaded and lashed down, it's time
to paddle!

<BlogImage src={HumberImg} alt="Kokopelli Brompton packraft" caption="Kokopelli
loaded with two Bromptons. Dingus for scale." />

Paddling is pretty much the same as in a tandem kayak, except there is less
space. The person in the back will want to keep their legs on either side of the
middle bike, and have their back directly against the rear inner-wall. The
shorter paddler should be in front, as they will have slightly less leg room.

Once you settle in, this setup is reasonably comfortable all things considered.
I can paddle this way for a few hours at a time without complaint, but there is
room for improvement. Eventually I would like to try strapping the second bike
to the back of the packraft, but for my boat this would involve adding more
D-rings.

## A new world to explore

The freedom to get out on the water — all without needing a car — is liberating.
Indeed, with a car most trips end where they started: at the parking lot. But
with this setup, trips can take on a new degree of flexibility; you can start in
one place, and end somewhere completely different. It's also a bonus when your
return trip doesn't involve getting stuck in Toronto traffic!